
# Introduction

I propose to develop a new approach to enable exploratory analysis of structured data and unstructured text in order to facilitate better health decision in the new strategies of treatments and preventions such as personalized cancer therapy, precision medicine, precision oncology, and patient-centered personalized risk information communication. In recent years, indeed, we have witnessed an increasing amounts of genomic and clinical data that have become publicly available through large-scale collaborative projects such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the MD Anderson Knowledge Base for Precision Oncology. Moreover, recent advances in ontologies, standards, data normalization, and other frameworks, have showed a great effectiveness in representing, inferencing, and extracting actionable data from datasets and medical texts. These recent advances have make it easy to cull very accurate data of small sub population from heterogeneous and long massive datasets. Using suitable data, our goal will be to develop interactive visualization-based analysis techniques that use the recent trends in machine learning methods in order to build clinical prediction models and propose best treatment options for individual patients.

# Background 

My research activities and findings center around data analytics and visualization and information system design. Biomedical informatics has witnessed the stunning transition of biology to data-intensive science, as recently, the access to cheap and fast technology has led to unprecedented amount of information and absolutely breath-taking advances in knowledge.

# Specific Aims in the project
- Patient history visualization: The work about the patient history aims at studying temporal events (e.g., diagnoses, treatments, prescriptions) throughout timeline of patient history in order to enable applications such as longitudinal studies, clinical question answering, and information retrieval. This is an ongoing four years project supported by the National Library of Medicine (R01LM011829) where I am participating in developing Time Event Ontology (TEO) which provides a formal conceptualization of temporal events in clinical narratives and expands the meta-level semantics classification and temporal reasoning capabilities. While this ontology is still under development and evaluation, I am working on a visual temporal grouping tool that enables labeling sequence of medical events with predefined time-bins. Some preliminary work has already been established and we are going to present it in a workshop in this VIS2016 conference.  

- Clinical Workflow Visualization: The work about workflow modeling for clinical health IT Healthcare systems, aims at studying the critical clinical health IT systems that require highly accommodation of user interactions and vast number of cognitive functions. In this area, in spite of using recent technologies and processes, there is still a gap between clinical workflows and EHR uses that hinder the development of rigorous specifications to verify such systems. To help bridge this gap and make better (verified) clinical decisions, we realized that the complex Conceptual Work Products (CWP) of such systems can be logically solvable and so we developed a state machine in Ontology Web Language (OWL) that can be used to abstract away the transitions of states in the conceptual work. This formal representation then has been used with a model checking tool to verify the effectiveness of a design by focusing on the state of the whole CWP’s state as users transform it to its goal state. The implementation of our approach was by developing a Work Domain Ontology which captures the essential features and requirements of the CWP in an OWL format and the CWP specification provided by translating the state machine to the ontology language.

    For the modeling tool we used SPIN (SPARQL Inferencing Notation), a recent ontology modeling language available as a W3C Member Submission. In contrast with other tools, SPIN allows an environment of both close word and unique name assumptions without compromising the semantic expressivity required for the ontology language. The development and the evaluation of the model (work domain, states, and transitions) as well as the consistency checking have been effectively done using SPIN.
This work is a collaboration between my supervisor in the Ontology Research Group, Dr. Cui Tao and the expert in workflow modeling for clinical health IT, Dr. Keith Butler (https://www.hcde.washington.edu/butler) and an expert on model checking systems Dr. Eric Mercer (https://cs.byu.edu/faculty/egm).

- Primary Care Predictive analysis: In the Primary Care Predictive analysis work, we aim to use a large dataset of EHRs collected in a primary care clinic to help making better clinical decisions. Our goal is the development and application of machine learning methods that perform predictive analysis of encounters data. This project is managed by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) protocol, and will have my supervisor Dr. Cui Tao and I working closely with Dr. Ryan James, a Primary care physician, to:

    - Establish a variety of prediction models to enhance the patient/provider experiences. For that we will consider a two steps process, first we will consider high level tasks only in the provider/ patient interaction (writing and readings tasks), and secondly, we will use an NLP tool to include the actionable clinical information from the vast and heterogeneous datasets of encounter’s narratives (i.e., ToDos and Notes).

   -  Build a visualization tool to visually display the results of the predictive analysis algorithms on multi/across patient data.
